---
layout: post
title: "My digital second brain set-up"
date: 2025-10-16
---

Here is the boring story of the set-up of my digital second brain.

### The origin of the digital second brain set-up odissey
The main challenge with the general second brain teaching is the rigidity of the structure. I am an incredible fan of creators like [August Bradley], [Thomas Frank], [Odysseas], [Tiago Forte], and many more [for a complete list of my favourites]. They hugely inspired me in everything I do, and I owe so much to their teaching. What I am a bit more dismissive about is the end-all-be-all approach with this kind of teaching. A second brain is a highly personalized tool. Every individual has their way of thinking, and as much as you try to adjust to someone else's the limitations are going to come up time and again. So, when I embarked on the serious phase of my second brain journey, I obviously got a lot of inspiration from these and other creators that seemed to have found the ultimate set-up. If you have gone, are going, or will go through a similar phase, it is a very exciting time. You discover so many different ways of restructuring your thinking, and how to leverage so many different tools for how to get there. But soon enough - for me around one year in - serious limitations arise. I realized that what I was given was just a template, but life gets usually in the way of pre-made templates. 
What I am going to describe below is how I started from those templates (making sure to reference those where possible) to get to my current set-up today. This is not a set-up that should be adopted, it is probably bade for most people, but is just a way to tell my story to come to my set-up and how everyone, including the good, the bad, and the ugly.
Every phase will have (1) the falling in love with the idea, always followed by (2) the disillusion of the same idea, sometimes with some learning coming out of it (sometimes not even that).
In each I will simplify certain things at the risk of appearing silly, but I honestly don't care.

### Where is SARA? She is behind those Pillars
(1) If you have ever read a bit about productivity, you might be familiar with the Projects, Areas, Resources, Archive method. It is a very simple, yet powerful way to think about your major parts of life. It is all about categorization. The true discovery of human kind, was not writing but how to categorize writing. Without categorization, storing information is useless, and the PARA method is a powerful framework to think about storing information about life. Every in life can be something you do (Projects), or you want to spend time on (Areas), learn about or store (Resources), or have done (Archive). And so it's really easy to store all this stuff away, just following this simple folder structure.
I spent some time with this, and found it most intriguing. It is true, most things in life fall in these categories. However, the harder part, is deciding what goes where when. Maybe at one point in time, health & fitness is a project (early in life); but at some other point it might be archived (usually during college life), or come back as an area (when you realized you are getting old and have not taken care of yourself). It is impossible to have the vision to see where each part will end up. But it is vital to the system, because if something is in archive, information will collect differently than if it is a project. As a result, I decided to make some twicks At the time I decided to slightly adjust it to SARA (Status, Areas, Resources, Actions), but more importantly make each of these interchangeable. In SARA Health & Fitness could be an Area that is Active (Status), that leads me to running, and stretching (Actions), and listen to the Huberman Lab podcast (Resources). Each of these pieces can live in these four axes at the same time. This was great! But... when you make everything so connected you lose sight of structure. And luckily at the time, I had come across the great August Bradley YouTube channel and his Pipelines, Pillars and Vault (PPV) model. At face value, very similar to PARA, with a more pyramidal approach, which at a time when I was looking for structure in that graph of links, was exactly the fix my brain was looking for. So I incorporated this in the overall system in what looked like a pyramidal PARA (Pillars and Values were setting a Roadmap, that was implemented through SARA).

(2) This was a big win. Now, things could be cross-sectional, and live in each of the four verticals. So that I could know at any point, what were the Active (Status) Projects (Actions) about my Full-Time Job (Area), or I could look up the Books (Resources) that I wanted To Read (Status) about Math (Area). I think for many this framework can be very powerful since it alleviates the burden of choosing where to categorize things at the time they come up, and instead assigning all parts so that you will have full visibility in all of them at the same time.

### Finding some zeTtelcASTEn (read only the capital letters)
(1) At a similar time, I also discovered another very well-known technique in the note-taking world called Zettlekasten. I don't know German but if Google AI isn't lying to me Zettlekasten means "note box", which I think does not give full justice to the Zettlekasten idea. The way I see it is Zettlekasten refers to the connections of thoughts and ideas [link]. It's all about making connections and resurfacing them at the right time. And this coupled with modern digital tools like Notion, Obsidian, and Roam is a pretty powerful innovation. During the Enlighthement, for example, the best way to connect ideas was what they did in the first Encyclopedia: they ordered things by concepts. Everything related to math would be together, everything related to philosophy would be together, and so on. This meant that if you wanted to move from one to another, like logic, which is part of both, you needed to either (1) put it in one and make a reference in the other (2) even worse copy-paste the information. If the information was ever updated, you had to somehow remember that you needed to update the same thing in the other place. This was a great way to be exhaustive and compartmentalize knowledge, but had the obvious flaw of hiding connections between things that were both in front of your eyes. You might say that we are long past Encyclopedias, but any search engine I am afraid works the same way today. You search for one information, and unless that information appears the same way in another source, it is not going to come up, which required that someone made that connection first, and decided to communicate it on the other side. This is the doom of a one-way link system. If A links to B, nothing guarantees that B links to A, unless who created B bothered to make that connection. 
Apologies for the long tangent, but this is what I frustratingly learned with Explore files folders, Google Drive folders, and any type of one-way link compartmentalization of knowledge. It was only when I started using Notion and Obsidian that I finally experimented with connecting two way. And that was not anymore restricted to thoughts, or ideas. I could now created a two way connection between the gym and my active diet. I could connect my active (Status) diet (project) to health & fitness (area) which had as other a habit (action) going to the gym. You might say: I didn't need that silly german word to link my diet to the gym, and that's very true. But I think what's less obvious is if you wanted to link that youtube video you watched 2 years ago [link] to a blog post that you would make two years later, since bothe video and this blog post were related to productivity, and the video (resource) linked to productivity (area) that had blog posts (projects) in the making. Finally, I had found some zeTtelcASTEn in my system, and I was very happy with it.

(2) Of course, after the few months of excitement, the limitations arose. You are still sifting through lots of stuff every time, you still need to remember if you ever recorded something, otherwise you will certainely not be able to find it, and you still need to maintain it, which costs additional pain. In my opinion this still is far outweighed by the benefits, but it's a tight race. But one more crack kept growing more an more: information - unlike "all men" - is not created equal. For example, [this] meme, as hilarious as it might be (maybe only for those that took computation theory), is not as important for my life as my [math textobook on linear algebra] might be. Yet, a Zettlekasten-powered SARA has no way to distinguish between the two. And I didn't like this. From a mess, things were becoming an organized mess, where things had no priority, but at least they were organized.

### Even Monkeys Get Things Done
(1) Two other classic ideas of productivity gurus are the nd the Eisenhower Matrix (EM) and Getting Things Done (GTD) by David Allen. This is so famous I almost feel bad explaining it, since I know it will be a waste of time for me writing it and for you reading this. But I will still do it for the 0% of you that are not familiar with it. GTD is more than anthing a workflow. One that starts from an input, and allegedly gets you to an output. It does so through a bunch of different checks (e.g. checking if it's actionable, guessing if it would take less than two minutes). And to priortize things you should use the Eisenhower Matrix: level of urgency; level of importance. There's a lot more nuances, but this is the gist. Certainly nothing earth-shuttering, but a decently consistent framework to have to prioritize the flow of information, how to store it, and in what order to do it. Full discolsure, I never used any of this. All I took away from this was: you need a consistent system to prioritize things, which is when I started thinking more seriously about connecting the Zettlekasten notes and the SARA to my calendar, as well as any actionable list. This is when I started building some dashboards. These were just pages where information was not segmented anymore, but would come together. I took this idea from Matthias Frank, who suggests that the system should be made by a backend (in my case a version of SARA + Zettlekasten) and a frontend (in my case a bunch of dashboards that would implicitly reflect EM and GTD). I had lived by the calendar for a long time. If something was not on my calendar it would not exist. But the burden of a calendar is that something has to be created and left there, since the calendar is a standalone system that is not connected with anything else. But this was also the time I was discovering Notion Calendar View, as well as Notion Calendar, which showed me the beauty of my backend full of pages about anything I would come across, and how this would connect with a beautiful fronted that showed up exactly the way I wanted. This was truly a leap: I had a way to log things, prioritize things, and take action on them. It was the heaven of digital productivity.

(2) However, as I came to learn Even Monkeys Get Things Done (EMGTD) and they certainly don't use either the GTD method or the Eisenhower Matrix. The system I had was as sophisticated as it was easy to break. A few days without maintenance would make it hard to manage, losing track of the things in it, just like I was losing track of life. If the system was getting closer and closer to a digital representation of my life, it needed to reflect its messiness, shortcomings, and its unexpected events. And so it would. But that meant I now needed to handle these not only in my real life, but on my digital life as well. And that was hard to accept. There were times where I considered giving up everything, and restarting from scratch or not re-starting at all with the false conviction that if I restarted things would get cleaned up, and I had a chance to build it the right way from scratch. But I never did. Maybe there was some sunk cost fallacy involved, but the result was that I stuck to it in the good and the bad times (I am fully aware that this is only a spoiled person problem, I am just trying to make this more engaging, not trying to say this is even close to the real problems in life 😁)

### Explo(ration/itation)
The past few systems have come directly from the world of productivity. This one comes from Computer Science. So I feel less bad explaining it, unless you have taken an introductory class in machine learning (who hasn't taken one these days actually?!). Essentially, when a model is giving out answers, it (he/she/they?) has two options: (1) exploit tried-and-true information, (2) or explore uncertain and potentially delayed feedback to give a potentially more accurate answer. The catch is that a priori there is no way to know if (2) will provide a better answer, and it will certainly cost more resources. This is a problem that humans face every day, but luckily we don't have to rely on a set algorithm or parameters to make the choice, we rely on intuition and sometimes thinking (although not so often[linking to Thinking fast and slow]). Sometimes in life it's hard to know when enough is enough. Is my paper good enough, or should I give it a few more reads before submitting? Is my job application compelling enough or should I review my cover letter one more time? These decisions are such examples, but if you extend this further, you come to a problematic point: what is the decision was on the system itself helping you make decisions (i.e. your second brain system), then you would want to make sure that is perfect, so that the choices will be perfect. But then when would you stop? Assuming good work is just a result of a series of tradeoffs between performances, you should never stop since the quest for perfection should be never-ending. According to Exploitation vs. Exploration model you should set a parameter, e.g. x, and only Explore with a % of time equal to the parameter x (i.e. only revisit your system at specific times according to x). I tried to this by inserting Reviews (week season, year reviews) [link to August Bradley reviews] seemed to be a working cadence for me as I tested that day was too often, and month too much gap. This was also in the short-term a good way to deal with my obsessively compulsive will to modify a system that was good enough but that was not perfect. 

I would be lying if I said that this solved the problem. I still to this day don't really know how to handle it. I try to be explicit about the days for creation vs. consumption vs. organization but it doesn't always work. It's a constant fight, against myself, my sense of imperfection, my sense of unsatisfaction, and just the joy of working towards an idealized (yet unachievable) perfect system.

### I don't have a good title for this (not that the others were good, to be clear)
I have skipped many iterations (I have forgotten an equal amount), and I have purposefully excluded others. But this simplified journey almost led us to today. 
Today I have 1. lost faith in a pyrmaidal strcture for pages as they are always put in question and challenged. I have accepted significant maintanance must be done to have a complex working system, and decided that I am ok with this tradeoff.
1. Today I use Notion as you might know. Every note lives in the same place, a single database (matteo@Notion:~$) to reflect the fact that everythign is connected. This database is pretty big (1500+ pages at the time of writing) and somewhat complext in its structure to allow each page to connect with any other page in a meaningfully structured way and carry information outside of the second brain itself. 
2. There is no starting page (like the Pillars used to be). The starting page is whatever page I need to be working on, reviewing or revisiting. There is a system which is maintained, but it does not govern the overall hierarchy. It is a page like others, and as such is not required to exist for the system to function. An important page is the Life OS page, which contains some information about how I think about storing information to keep structure: 
- pillars, life learnings and values, my philosophy, my personal brand, which together define where I start from, where I am going and how I am getting there (this is reviewed during the review times to ensure that I am on the right track and otherwise adjust if needed)
- status, tags, actions, resources, which together stores information in an easily retrievable way, and ensure that my inner side has a representation in my day-to-day life experiences.
- there are many other angles to look at the structure (e.g. creation vs. consumption vs. organization is an important one that does not feature in the description abroad but can be equally utilized by the current Notion system) 
As I said, this does not have priority. It is just the way I think about storing information in the system today, but does not influence the set-up. If tomorrow I decided to overhaul this, the system would not be affected. The system purely exists in the single database. But without the overarching structures the system is less mobile, and more monolithic.
I hope you enjoyed my journey, I certainly enjoyed mine. As I stole from [link], the journey is the destination (a true cliche, but a good cliche to reminded of in my opinion).

